NewForm UI Challenge
February Edition
Problem Statement:
Your challenge is to design a website homepage for your favorite book, movie, or TV show. Think about the essential elements that define it - the characters, the setting, the key plot points. How would these elements be represented on a website? What kind of interactivity or content would engage fellow fans? Be creative and think outside the book (or screen)! Share your vision of how this story continues in the online world."


There are no tool restrictions. So feel free to use your favorite tool and come up with creative designs.




Important Dates:
1st Feb 2024      - Problem Statement Release


21st Feb 2024    - Deadline for Submissions


26th Feb 2024   - Results announced










Rules and Regulations


1. Participants must have a Paypal account.
2. The designs submitted must be purely their own work. Using someone else’s work will result in instant disqualification and the participant will be barred from future challenges.
3. One person can make only 1 submission.
4. Participants can submit their designs in the WebX Community website (webxcommunity.com/uichallenges). (change this)
5. New: Participants are required to submit an image showcasing their work in the dimensions (1080x1350 - width x height). This would be used if we so choose to feature your work in our socials/website. 
6. There is no minimum or maximum amount of screens. Enough should be used to clearly demonstrate your solution. Participants will have 21 days to come up with a solution and submit their designs. The exact time for submissions will be announced when the problem statement is released. 
7. Winners are decided by the unanimous vote of the WebX team. The judgment made by the team is final.
8. New: Prizes: Winner (1 person) - 150$ 
Runner up (1 person) - 70$
3rd Place - 30$
9. Winners will be announced 5 days after the submission time ends (on Sept 26th)
10.  By participating, you agree to our terms and conditions.


Terms and Conditions
   1. The competition is completely free and no registration fee is required.
   2. The problem statement reveal, submission of entries, judgments and announcements of winners all take place at our discord server.
   3. We do not own the info you submit but by submitting you agree that we can share your Submissions on our social media with your name attached.  If you don’t wish this, you can mention to the team to remove your name. Also do note that these features are solely to boost the participants and help them get recognized. We do not hold any kind of partnerships with Instagram, Facebook, Twitter or any social media platforms.
   4. Other than featuring we do not sell, trade, or otherwise transfer to outside parties your personally identifiable information or works unless we provide you with advance notice. 
   5. WebX team has the right to cancel the challenge anytime due to unforeseen circumstances. Any changes to the competition will be notified to participants as soon as possible.
   6. WebX can change the terms and services any time at its sole discretion.
   7. WebX team has the right to change/modify the winners based on unfair voting patterns.
   8. No responsibility can be accepted for entries not received within the deadline irrespective of the reason. 
   9. We are not responsible for inaccurate details supplied to any participant by any third party connected with this competition. Only the details given by the founding members in our discord channel are official.
   10. We are not responsible for not sending the prizes, if participants do not have a PayPal account.
   11. If you have any questions, you can ask them on our server.